------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Vancouver Estival Trivia Open 2013

Trans-Canada Championship Match, combined packet of TOSSUPS.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

   B2B Trans-Canada Tossup Questions

   Literature Tossup

   After Snowden dies, he goes around nude for a period of time, complains
   to the chaplain and other offices, and fakes illness. Despite all this,
   he is forced to continue flying for the Air Force during World War II.
   He deals with his distress by visting prostitutes and having a
   relationship with Nurse Duckett in an attempt to control his body if
   not his life. After being forced to fly more missions than any group he
   decides to desert. For ten points, name this Joseph Heller character
   from Catch-22.

   ANSWER: Yossarian

   Current Events/Pop Culture/Games/Sports Tossup

   This character’s most memorable line is “with pleasure,” in response to
   Al Zimmer’s request “Could you give me one more?”  This character
   appeared on the cover of Variety in 1927, not for his film premiere but
   for hamming it up for the cameras with unknown actress Peppy Miller, of
   whom the paper asks “Who’s That Girl?”  For ten points, name this
   character who gave Peppy Miller both her start and her beauty spot, an
   actor portrayed by Jean Dujardin in The Artist.

   ANSWER:  George Valentin [accept either]

   Fine Arts/Religion/Philosophy/Myth/General Knowledge Tossup

   In 2009, art collector Gus Horn and artist Adad Hannah arranged for a
   restaging of this monumental painting in 100 Mile House, British
   Columbia.  Locals were recruited to be models and volunteers for that
   recreation of this painting and the final cast included 20 students and
   two tree planters.  In 2009 photos of that recreation of this painting
   appeared at the Toronto International Art Fair.  For ten points, name
   this restaged work which shares the same name as the original based on
   an 1818-1819 painting by Theodore Gericault, whose subject is found at
   the Louvre of aan 1816 ship sinking.

   by Theodore Gericault.

   ANSWER:  The Raft of the Medusa [or Le Radeau de la Meduse]

------------------------------------------------------------------------------

   VETO 2013 Bellevue Trans-Canada Match Tossup Questions

   Different orders of these functions are predicted to share no zeros
   except zero by Bourget’s Hypothesis. Choosing a[0] [a-nought] in its
   series form as 1 over the quantity (2 to the n times n factorial)
   creates the first kind of this function. These are solutions to the
   equation x-squared y’’ [y-double-prime] plus x y’ [y-prime] plus the
   quantity x-squared minus n-squared close quantity times y equals 0. For
   10 points, name these functions originally used to solve Kepler’s
   Equation by their namesake, which are represented by the symbol J[n]
   [capital J sub n].

   ANSWER: Bessel functions [accept cylinder functions or cylindrical
   harmonics]

   The protagonist of this novel rejects Thor Heyerdahl's book on the
   Kon-Tiki while working at McGraw-Hill and inherits gold from the sale
   of an ancestor’s slave named Artiste. Its title character served as a
   stenographer for Rudolf Hoess before meeting Nathan Landau in New York.
   This novel is narrated by Stingo, and its title character was played on
   screen by Meryl Streep for her first Best Actress Oscar. For 10 points,
   name this William Styron novel about the title Holocaust survivor.

   ANSWER: Sophie's Choice

   A highway of this name is connected to the Silver Trail, which extends
   it to Mayo, and more directly passes through Carmacks and Stewart
   Crossing. Skookum Jim Mason and “Lyin’” George Carmack gained fame for
   working in a region of this name. A river of this name begins in the
   Ogilvie Mountains, has tributaries like Bonanza Creek, and joins a
   larger river at Dawson. For 10 points, give this name shared by a Yukon
   River tributary and an 1896 gold rush.

   ANSWER: Klondike

------------------------------------------------------------------------------

   TOSSUP from FARSIDE team

   Every year, five hundred thousand Canadians acquire this medical
   condition. Its rate of incidence in Canada was at its highest from 1957
   until 1961, when the introduction of the preventive drug norethisterone
   helped reduce the rate by half over the next twelve years. Though
   seldom fatal in itself, it can develop into life-threatening eclampsia
   or hyperemesis gravidarum. In 1968, Canada's first private clinics
   specializing in reversing this condition were opened by Dr. Henry
   Morgentaler, but most people who have it leave it untreated; no known
   case has lasted more than three hundred and seventy-five days. For 10
   points, what often-painful medical condition experienced by women ends
   with either miscarriage, abortion, or birth?

   Answer: _pregnancy_

   =====================================================================

   TOSSUP from FARSIDE team

   It is derived fifty-five per cent from Computer Assisted Personal
   Observation, ten per cent from telephone interviews, fifteen per cent
   from other Statistics Canada programs, and twenty per cent by
   extraction of data from other sources and questionnaires. Since May
   2007, the official time base has been set to the year 2002. It has
   eight major components, the smallest of which is Alcoholic beverages
   and tobacco products, weighted at two point seven nine per cent in
   January 2013. Covering six hundred goods and services, for 10 points,
   what is this indicator of the cost of living?

   Answer: (all-items) _Consumer Price Index_

   ======================================================================

   TOSSUP from FARSIDE team

   One of the oldest extant examples is named for the nineteenth-century
   German collector Carl Roettgen, and has been dated circa 1320. Carved
   in wood, the rectangular eighty-nine-centimetre-high sculpture is
   painted in both blue and red. The one in the Museo dell'Opera del Duomo
   in Florence was completed in 1555 and is unusual in that it depicts
   four marble figures, including either Nicodemus or Joseph of Arimathea,
   and was intended for the tomb of the artist himself, whose earlier
   two-meter-high pyramidal work of this same type, commissioned by
   Cardinal Jean Bilhères, is in St. Peter's Basilica. For 10 points, what
   is this kind of sculpture, by Michelangelo and others, that shows Mary
   holding the dead Christ?

   Answer: _Pietà_ (accept _Vesperbild_)

------------------------------------------------------------------------------

   McMaster tossups

   Tossups:

   1. Herman G. Felhoelter, an American chaplain, was awarded the
   Distinguished Service Cross for an incident later known as the
   Chaplain–Medic massacre that took place during this battle, which saw
   forces of the US Army attempt to defend the headquarters of the 24th
   Infantry Division against numerically superior forces. Although US
   forces could not hold the city, the 24th Infantry Division achieved a
   strategic advantage by delaying the North Koreans, providing time for
   other American divisions to establish a defensive perimeter around
   Pusan further south. FTP, identify this important battle of the Korean
   War fought in July 1950, named after a major city and transportation
   hub in modern day South Korea.

   Answer: Battle of Taejon (Daejon)

   2. The first version of this work was painted around 1611. The
   Forchondt brothers sold both versions of this painting to Hans-Adam I,
   Prince of Liechtenstein around 1700. In 1767, these works were
   attributed to one of the artist’s assistants, Jan van den Hoecke,
   however, in 2001 George Gordon, an expert in Flemish and Dutch
   paintings at Sotheby's was persuaded that they were indeed by the
   artist and not his assistant. In 2008 one of these works was featured
   at the Art Gallery of Ontario in Toronto, to coincide with its major
   rebuilding and expansion. Featuring the biblical narrative of
   infanticide and gendercide by Herod the Great, so as to avoid the loss
   of his throne to a newborn King of the Jews, name these identically
   titled paintings by Peter Paul Reubens, chronicling events featured in
   the Book of Matthew.

   Answer: Massacre of the Innocents

   3. This country is estimated to have one of the fastest growing
   economies in the world due to large exports of gold, cocoa, diamond and
   oil, among others. Nine official languages are spoken here and its name
   is derived from an old word meaning “Warrior King”. By the early 11th
   century the Akan were firmly established here and in the 18th century,
   the Ashanti Empire was established. This nation borders Burkina Faso to
   the North and the Gulf of Guinea to the south. In 1896, the English
   made it a protectorate and called it The Gold Coast, which it was known
   until 1957 when it was the first sub-Saharan African country to gain
   independence from England. Including the major cities of Kumasi and
   Tamale, FTP, name this West African nation with capital at Accra.

   Answer: Ghana

------------------------------------------------------------------------------

   Oregon
   Tossup 1

   The first written record of this genus of animals may have been
   Herodotus's account of giant gold-digging ants in India. Of the 15
   species in the genus, the Hoary and Yellow-bellied types thrive in the
   alpine and subalpine meadows and talus slopes of the Canadian Rockies
   and Kootenays, while the Vancouver Island variety is endemic to that
   island. Perhaps the most common species in North America is the
   groundhog, scientific abbreviation M. Monax. FTP, name this type of
   large rotund ground squirrel known for its whistling and burrowing.

   ANSWER: marmot or Marmota

   Tossup 2

   It was first given to the short-lived sons of the Duke of York, who
   later became James II of England. The next holder was Prince George
   Augustus of Hanover who was granted this title in 1706 after entering
   the line of succession to the English throne. The penultimate holder, a
   grandson of George III, served as Commander-in-Chief of the Forces
   British Army. Upon his death the title was not revived until April 29,
   2011. FTP, what is this title, which was re-created at the marriage of
   Kate Middleton and current title holder Prince William?

   ANSWER: Duke of Cambridge

   Tossup 3

   This author's first novel, ~Moscow Novella~, was an earnest attempt at
   socialist realism, and the next, ~Divided Heaven~, dealt with the issue
   of illegal emigration from her country in the early 1960s. A winner of
   national literature prizes in three nations, she dealt with themes of
   fascism, feminism, and self-discovery. Critical of GDR leadership, but
   loyal to the values of socialism, she died in a reunified Berlin in
   2011. For 10 points--name this formerly East German author of ~The
   Quest for Christa T~. a

   nswer: Christa _Wolf_ (or Christa _Ihlenfeld_)

------------------------------------------------------------------------------

   SFU Tossups

   Some inaccuracies in this this woodcut include small twisted horn on
   its back, scaly legs and saw-like rear quarters. Several thousand
   prints were made, depicting an animal given by an Indian sultan to King
   Manuel of Portugal in 1515. The animal was the first to arrive in
   Europe since the days of the Roman Empire and caused a sensation.
   Seeking approval for his Eastern empire, the king sent the animal as a
   gift to the pope. However, the ship carrying the animal sank in a storm
   and the unfortunate titular animal was drowned. For ten points, name
   this famous 1515 woodcut by a German printmaker and painter.

   Dürer’s Rhinoceros

   In 1391, Chaucer wrote a treatise on this instrument for his young son,
   who was keen to learn how to use one. It consists of a disk, called the
   mater, which is deep enough to hold one or more flat plates called
   tympans. A tympan is made for a specific latitude and is engraved with
   a stereographic projection of circles denoting azimuth and altitude.
   First made in Greece around 150BC, this scientific instrument is useful
   for determining latitude and can be used to determine the time of day
   using the sun or stars. For ten points, name this medieval instrument
   named for the Greek for “star-taker”.

   Astrolabe

   This story featuring two best buds is subtitled “He who Saw the Deep”.
   They journey on an adventure to defeat a giant with a lion’s face,
   fiery breath, and the ability to hear any rustling within a hundred
   leagues within his home cedar forest. Enkidu, the protagonist’s best
   bud, was created by the gods as his equal to distract him from
   oppressing the people of Uruk. The second half of the story focuses on
   the protagonist's distress at Enkidu's death and his quest for
   immortality. For ten points, name this Babylonian poem.

   Epic of Gilgamesh

------------------------------------------------------------------------------

   Trans-Canada Finals

   UBC questions by Michael Whitaker, Steph Wilson, Rob Freeman, and
   Trevor Alexander

   A primary account of this event comes from Lady Fancourt, whose husband
   was killed in the course of the evening. The conspirators gathered at
   the palace under the pretext of attending a wedding, and at one point a
   Mysore flag was raised above the fort as a sign of victory, but it was
   quelled the next morning by Rollo Gillespie’s reinforcements. One
   consequence of it was the recall of John Cradock, whose attempt to
   improve the soldierly appearance of his troops forbade earrings, caste
   markings, and beards. For ten points, an East India Company fortress
   was captured by more than 1,000 Madras Native Infantry in what 1806
   rebellion, that predated the Sepoy Mutiny by 50 years?

   ANSWER: _Vellore_ Mutiny (accept clear-knowledge equivalents)

   In March 2013, Ministry of Environmental Protection official Zhao
   Penggao warned that failure to curb air pollution might betoken the
   loss of this. Applying it to the Five Dynasties period or other eras of
   pluralistic rule has been problematic, though the Duke of Zhou and
   Mencius invoked it to justify the downfall of the Shang and succession
   of the Zhou dynasty. Demanding a singular national ruler and beneficent
   leadership, gaining it is the first step in the dynastic cycle theory.
   For ten points, what is this notion of Chinese political legitimation
   based on conditional divine sanction?

   ANSWER: _Mandate of Heaven_ (also accept Tianmìng)

   He married Paola Ruffo di Calabria of Italy in 1959. Since then he
   filled a mostly ceremonial role, though his importance arguably peaked
   between 2007 and 2011 when he emerged as a popular unifying figure
   while his country spent over 500 days without a government, due to
   increasing regional tensions between Flanders and Wallonia. Following
   suit of his counterpart in a neighboring country, this monarch decided
   to stay on-trend, as it were, citing health reasons. For ten points,
   this meant that son Philippe succeeded what man on July 21, 2013 as
   King of the Belgians?

   ANSWER: _Albert II_

------------------------------------------------------------------------------

   U of T grad alumni tossups

   A Judith Butler work titled for its main character’s “Claim” is
   subtitled “Kinship between Life and Death.” Its chorus of Elders gives
   a choral hymn to Dionysus before hearing of a prophecy fulfillment that
   the main antagonist would lose a son. Hearing of Haemon’s suicide,
   Eurydice kills herself offstage. Opening with the title character
   attempting to convince Ismene to help bury an enemy of Eteocles, the
   titular character is buried alive for defying Theban law in burying
   that man, Polyneices. For 10 points name this 441 BCE drama, the last
   of Sophocles's Theban Trilogy, about Oedipos’ daughter in the aftermath
   of the Seven Against Thebes.

   ANSWER: Antigone

   Replacing the term “superstition” with “survival” to indicate early
   origin, this author of Researches into the Early History of Mankind and
   the Development of Civilization considered an omnipotent God to be a
   survival. Associated with Henry Christy, with whom he travelled to
   Mexico, this first Professor of Anthropology at Oxford published his
   first work, Anahuac, on his field work, after which he never travelled
   again. Knighted in 1912 for contributions such as On a Method of
   Investigating the Development of Institutions; applied to Laws of
   Marriage and Descent, his best known work is in two volumes titled for
   the titular “Origins” and “Religion”. For 10 points name this British
   19th century anthropologist and sociologist, author of Primitive
   Culture.

   ANSWER: Edward Burnett Tylor

   This designer of the Metals Bank Building in Butte, Montana and New
   York City’s 90 West Street also designed the St. Louis Public Library,
   the Spalding Building in Portland, Oregon, and Battle Hall for the
   University of Texas at Austin. He was President of the American
   Institute of Architects from 1908-1909 and was prolific in government
   buildings, examples of which include the Alexander Hamilton U.S. Custom
   House, the Minnesota, Arkansas and West Virginia State Capitols, and
   the current United States Supreme Court building (opened posthumously).
   For 10 points, name this Beaux arts American architect, proponent of
   skyscrapers such as his Woolworth Building in New York.

   ANSWER: Cass Gilbert (Do NOT Accept or Prompt on Charles Pierrepont
   Henry Gilbert)

------------------------------------------------------------------------------

   University of Washington A tossups

   A moon of this planet has areas of magnetism in the crust despite
   having no internal magnetic field. That moon possesses four impact
   structures, which include the Nectaris and Imbrium basins, used to date
   objects on its surface. One mission to observe the planet itself was
   called Deep Impact. This planet has an aphelion of approximately 150
   Million kilometers and has an axis that is 23 degrees tilted from its
   orbital path. For 10 points, name this planet that contains Canada, the
   third from the sun.

   ANSWER: Earth

   In this novel, one character distributes pamphlets around his school
   declaring that 17 goes into 56 way more than 3.294 times as a joke,
   referring to the sexual relations between an administrator and a
   student. That administrator, Avril, is Quebecois and was married to a
   man who often found himself impotent due to his belief that only a
   finite number of erections could exist in the world at any one time and
   he felt himself unworthy. That man, James, committed suicide by placing
   his head in a microwave after drinking some Wild Turkey and was buried
   in the Year of the Trial Size Dove Bar. For 10 points, name this
   massive novel by David Foster Wallace.

   ANSWER: Infinite Jest

   A certain poem in anapestic tetrameter appears tattooed on the back of
   one character in this show, and another figure remarks on the
   “crepuscular” nature of her pet. President Niyazov is referenced in
   “Once Bitten” during an encounter with a man who has renamed many
   things after his dog, and in another episode the main character gets
   drunk in a Montreal casino and calls his mom, who refuses to help out
   of fear that he is working with a herd of Quebec whores and has
   contracted a Canadian socialist venereal disease. Jessica Walter plays
   the title character’s boss and mother in, for 10 points, what adult
   cartoon that centers on spies working for ISIS?

   ANSWER: Archer

------------------------------------------------------------------------------

   University of Washington B tossups

   It’s not weeds, but Canadian artist Nicole Dextras specializes in
   making words out of this medium such as Signs of Change. They were not
   taken in Japan, but Herbert George Ponting gained fame photographing
   structures composed of this medium. Claes Oldenburg created a kinetic
   sculpture that according to its title is a giant bag of this substance.
   One painting that is almost entirely taken up by this material is
   alternatively called The Wreck of Hope. For 10 points, name this cold
   material that Caspar David Friedrich painted a sea of and people play
   hockey on in a Pieter Bruegel the Elder painting titled for hunters in
   a powdered form of it.

   ANSWER: ice [reverse prompt on snow]

   The enzyme that catalyzes this molecule's formation is regulated by
   phosphorylation of its serine 158. One common way to prepare this
   compound is phosphatation followed by treatment with bone char. It's
   not lactose, but intolerance to this molecule is far more common in
   Canadian and Alaskan Inuits than in the rest of the human population
   and that intolerance can be treated with an enzyme from S. cerevisiae.
   This molecule is decomposed by invertase. It is made of an alpha 1 2
   glycosidic bonding of glucose and fructose. For 10 points, name this
   compound that makes up table sugar.

   ANSWER: sucrose [prompt on sugar until mentioned]

   One poem-song from this land features a woman on a harp telling the
   story of an old man and his wife who walked into a river and drowned.
   Poetry forms from here include hyangga, changga, and Sijo. One ruler of
   this place commissioned the Song of the Dragons Flying to Heaven to
   tell the story of his dynasty. Myths and legends from here were
   collected into the Memorabilia of the Three Kingdoms. Poet Ko Un is
   from this place. For 10 points, name this peninsula whose literature is
   mainly written in Hanja (Chinese script) and Hangul.

   ANSWER: Korea [or South Korea; or North Korea before Ko Un; or Korean]

------------------------------------------------------------------------------

   Waterloo (Aayush, Cam, Jj, Huma)

   Science, Math, Technology

   An experiment by Frederick Griffith was one of the first studies to
   show that this molecule can be used for the genetic alteration of
   bacteria cells. Similar experiments were later done by Oswald Avery,
   showing that the bacteria would only transform in the presence of this
   polymer. It contains a sugar that has a hydrogen atom in place of a
   hydroxyl group, which explains why its name implies a removed oxygen
   atom. One of the constituents of its monomers is a nitrogenous base,
   usually either a purine or a pyrimidine. The most common structure of
   this molecule is referred to as its “B” form, and was discovered by
   James Watson and Francis Crick. For 10 points, name this molecule which
   takes a double helix shape and encodes genetic information for living
   organisms.

   ANSWER: _deoxyribonucleic acid_ [accept _DNA_]

   Current Events OR Popular Culture, Games, Sports

   A commercial for Sprint featuring this athlete shows a woman’s husband
   waking up as him after watching the NBA late at night on his phone.
   Another commercial featuring this athlete shows him dreaming about
   being stuffed by Dwyane Wade which prompts him to undergo a rigorous
   Gatorade fueled workout regimen that allows him to successfully dunk on
   Wade. All of this is then revealed to have taken place in Wade’s dream.
   Probably the best known commercial featuring this man shows him in a
   room with a detective who is investigating “another vicious dunking”
   with a Foot Locker employee who identifies the shoe of the culprit as
   the Nike KD 5, and then asks this man why he’s missing his shoe. For 10
   points, this is which small forward on the Oklahoma City Thunder, who
   is dismissed as a suspect because he is the nicest guy in the NBA.

   ANSWER: Kevin _Durant_

   Fine Arts OR Religion, Philosophy, Mythology OR General Knowledge

   In one painting, this artist used fluid brushstrokes to paint grass
   which resembles waves of water at the bottom half of the canvas, while
   wavy horizontal lines are used for the leaves of the trees which
   dominate the top half. This artist of A Rushing Sea of Undergrowth used
   elements of Impressionism and Fauvism in many of her works. Her most
   famous work shows the title carved bird standing against mountains in
   swirling grass, looking over and away from the viewer. For 10 points,
   name this Canadian artist of Big Raven, known primarily for paintings
   inspired by the First Nations cultures of the West Coast.

   ANSWER: Emily _Carr_
